.TH LATEXMK 1 "April 2026" "py-latexmk" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
latexmk \- automated LaTeX build tool (Python port)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B latexmk
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIfile ...\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlatexmk\fR builds LaTeX documents by running the required tools
(latex/pdflatex/lualatex/xelatex, bibtex/biber, makeindex, and related
post-processing) until outputs converge.

This manual describes the Python reimplementation (\fBpy-latexmk\fR).
It is adapted from the upstream Perl \fBlatexmk\fR manual and aligned to
the behavior implemented in this repository.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
The project aims to preserve user-visible behavior of Perl \fBlatexmk\fR,
with explicit non-goals and divergences documented in project files.

Primary invariants:
.IP \(bu 2
CLI compatibility for common editor workflows.
.IP \(bu 2
Stable exit codes and diagnostics prefix (\fBlatexmk:\fR).
.IP \(bu 2
\fB.fdb_latexmk\fR format compatibility.
.SH OPTIONS
The following high-value options are supported (not exhaustive):
.SS Output format
\fB-pdf\fR, \fB-pdfdvi\fR, \fB-pdflua\fR, \fB-pdfxe\fR, \fB-pdf-\fR,
\fB-dvi\fR/\fB-dvi-\fR, \fB-dvilua\fR, \fB-ps\fR/\fB-ps-\fR,
\fB-output-format=\fIF\fR.
.SS Engine commands
\fB-latex[=\fICMD\fR]\fR, \fB-pdflatex[=\fICMD\fR]\fR,
\fB-lualatex[=\fICMD\fR]\fR, \fB-xelatex[=\fICMD\fR]\fR,
\fB-bibtex[=\fICMD\fR]\fR, \fB-biber[=\fICMD\fR]\fR,
\fB-stdtexcmds\fR.
.SS Directories
\fB-auxdir=\fID\fR, \fB-aux-directory=\fID\fR,
\fB-outdir=\fID\fR, \fB-output-directory=\fID\fR,
\fB-out2dir=\fID\fR, \fB-cd\fR/\fB-cd-\fR,
\fB-emulate-aux-dir\fR/\fB-emulate-aux-dir-\fR.
.SS Bibliography and indexing
\fB-bibtex\fR, \fB-bibtex-\fR, \fB-nobibtex\fR,
\fB-bibtex-cond\fR, \fB-bibtex-cond1\fR,
\fB-biber\fR, \fB-makeindex\fR handling, glossary fallback behavior.
.SS Build control
\fB-f\fR/\fB-f-\fR, \fB-g\fR/\fB-g-\fR, \fB-gg\fR, \fB-gt\fR,
\fB-recorder\fR/\fB-recorder-\fR, \fB-interaction=\fIMODE\fR.
.SS Preview
\fB-pv\fR, \fB-pvc\fR/\fB-pvc-\fR, \fB-view=\fIWHAT\fR,
\fB-pvctimeoutmins=\fIN\fR, \fB-new-viewer\fR/\fB-new-viewer-\fR.
.SS Cleanup
\fB-c\fR, \fB-C\fR, \fB-CA\fR, \fB-CF\fR.
.SS Dependency output
\fB-M\fR, \fB-MF\fR \fIFILE\fR, \fB-MP\fR,
\fB-deps\fR/\fB-deps-\fR, \fB-deps-out=\fIFILE\fR,
\fB-deps-escape=\fIKIND\fR.
.SS Config and diagnostics
\fB-norc\fR, \fB-r\fR \fIFILE\fR, \fB-help\fR, \fB-version\fR,
\fB-commands\fR, \fB-dir-report\fR, \fB-dir-report-only\fR,
\fB-diagnostics\fR, \fB-quiet\fR/\fB-silent\fR.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration uses TOML (not Perl code execution).
Merge order is:
.IP "1." 3
System config
.IP "2." 3
User config
.IP "3." 3
Project config
.IP "4." 3
Additional CLI config files (\fB-r\fR)

\fB-norc\fR disables steps 1 through 3.
CLI flags override loaded config values.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
\fB0\fR
Success.
.TP
\fB10\fR
Bad options.
.TP
\fB11\fR
Missing file.
.TP
\fB12\fR
Build failure.
.TP
\fB13\fR
Configuration error.
.TP
\fB20\fR
Internal error.
.SH FILES
.TP
\fBlatexmk.toml\fR, \fB.latexmk.toml\fR
Project configuration files.
.TP
\fB.fdb_latexmk\fR
Build state database.
.TP
\fB*.fls\fR, \fB*.log\fR, \fB*.aux\fR, \fB*.bcf\fR
Inputs for dependency and rerun detection.
.SH DIFFERENCES FROM PERL LATEXMK
Key intentional differences include:
.IP \(bu 2
No programmable \fB.latexmkrc\fR Perl evaluation.
.IP \(bu 2
No \fB-e CODE\fR execution mode.
.IP \(bu 2
No embedded Perl fallback.

See project change logs for detailed divergence notes.
.SH COPYRIGHT
This manual page is an adaptation based on the upstream Perl
\fBlatexmk\fR manual by John Collins and contributors.

Upstream \fBlatexmk\fR is distributed under GNU GPL v2.
This repository uses GNU GPL v2 licensing.
.SH SEE ALSO
latex(1), pdflatex(1), lualatex(1), xelatex(1), bibtex(1), biber(1),
makeindex(1)
